---
layout: post
title: Del Woodin
---
*Villa Monterey, Scottsdale, Arizona*


Del Woodin was a wise and tough old soul from the American West.  Now that he’s gone I feel I’ve lost a link to the epic past of this region. To a time before this subdivision we’re in today and all the other developments that dot the once empty spaces of Del’s youth.  He leaves behind a loving wife, two children, many extended family and friends, an assortment of bola ties, the last rear wheel drive model sedan that Cadillac built,  eight cases of Budweiser, and a pair of Lacacia cowboy boots—the pinnacle of mankind’s achievement in footwear and a feature in Del’s closet and conversation for much of his 86 years.

Del was a loyal man, full of plain-spoken praise for what he loved.  These are fine qualities for an uncle.  But when I first knew him I didn’t focus so much on these qualities as on his unique character. 

As many of you know, Del kept a small house next to a large algae bloom in California, which everyone called Clear Lake though few could explain why.  I say a small house now, but I would not have described it so then, I was small myself, nothing more than a little peanut as Del said, and the space seemed a summer castle, with Del and Hazel presiding.  

Del was a strong presence at the lake. He built their home, he built their boat, he helped neighbors with similar tasks.  His hands were rough and large but he carried them gently.  Everywhere he went a white cocker-poo named Pippa trailed behind.  To a child, Del’s strength built surprises into that house on the lake.  He’d put these Murphy beds in the entry way that folded right out of the wall, and I would lie there in wait in hopes that myself or some unsuspecting adult might get folded into the wall like the movies.  But it was Del himself that often surprised me most.  He was so different than  other men I knew that he became like a character in a epic poem, a sort of Odysseus in retirement.  Just as that old Greek had strange chimeras, half goat half lion, to vanquish, Del had a strange El Dorado, half car half truck,  to refurbish.  And just as that old Greek had stories of shipwreck, Del had his,  a harrowing tale of he and a crew of aunts and uncles struggling to escape a motor boat upended by mysterious forces beneath the lake as Pippa swam valiantly to shore.  But perhaps most important for any epic, there were hints of a years-long struggle to find true love.  Even as a child I sensed that Del and Hazel looked on each other as their reward at the end of trying journey. 

I was born into this tale of Del and the lake midway through. He’d been there for some years before my memory began to take note.  Students of narratives would say that I was introduced to this story In Medias Res, a latin phrase that means in the middle.  It’s a technique to increase one’s interest in what comes before and after. And it works.  I often listened close for Del to recount tales of his youth. It helped that he had this manner of speaking that could always draw me in.  He had this mannerism where he’d pause to interrupt himself with a rhetorical question in order to make his point more dramatically.  When I was a child these points often had clear application with regards my behavior. They often ended: “well I’ll tell you, when we were growing up and my father sat down to the table with something to say, why….. you better believe we listened.” Even when he was moralizing, this dramatic flair set to me to wondering about the times he’d allude to. 

There’s a photo of Del as a young man that used to hang on the wall at the lake.  In this photo, he’s staring with his blue eyes off into this great expanse of land.  I always imagined the past world he spoke of and all the secrets of his unique character were hidden somewhere out in that big expanse. 

I remember one story he told. It was about work.  He was very young and in San Francisco I believe he said, where work was hard to come by. But he got himself a job with a brick maker, moving stacks of bricks off of drying racks or storages racks and onto trucks. These stacks sat on a sheets of plywood and he said they weren’t real heavy, but you had to be careful to hold it level or all the bricks would slide right off.  Then he held out his arms in front of him like this….. to show how he held them steady.  By the end of his first day he said he’d never been so dog-tired in his life.  So he went back to the house he stayed in at the time and he filled up a bathtub with hot water and he soaked in it for a good hour to relax.  The next morning he wakes up and he couldn’t barely lift his arms an inch they were so sore. Del went to the man then and said he was sorry but he couldn’t work today and the man had better go and hire someone else.  Del said it was the only day in his life he didn’t manage to do the job expected of him.  And the lesson he took from that:  a man had to watch out for hot tubs, they’ll wear you out. 

But aside from such brief glimpses back, mostly his story moved forward, and I had few chances to hear about it. They moved away from the lake, we moved to Colorado.   

When I got little older and looked back on my time at the lake I began to attach terms to some of Del’s qualities that had impressed me so. I learned descriptors like loyalty and resolve and so forth.  But it wasn’t until my grandmother got sick the second time, just a few years ago, that I began to understand what those qualities really meant to Del.

We weren’t sure my grandmother would survive the night when Del and Hazel left their lives here to be with her in California.  But hours turned into days and then weeks and months.  Hazel committed herself to stay and care, Del committed himself to stay and be a steadying force in a house beset by emotion.  I saw him at my grandparent’s table many days and felt the calm assurance of his patience, his loyalty.  It can’t have been his easy for Del. I could see his back pained him, I knew it was difficult for him to live so far from his own home, and I could only imagine the sacrifice he made for our sakes.  But as I came and went over the better part of a year, Del stayed.  

When I think about Del today I can’t help but think there’s some things about our relationship that I never resolved. Like I never let him buy me cowboy boots even though he tried every time we saw each other.  I don’t know why. At first I refused because I was suspicious that if I got boots like Del’s may toes would all start come to a point like his did.  But after a while I think it became a way to assert my own personal preferences against Del’s own dogged loyalty to his.  It was childish, and in a childish way reflected the behavior of the adults around me.  Sometimes these adults were contrary with Del. Maybe they’d make a big fuss at how water-downed that Budweiser was even though I’d seen them drink at other people’s house without a complaint.  Or maybe when talking about cars they’d bring up the Achilles heel of all Cadillacs—gas mileage. Or even worse maybe they’d openly admit to voting Republican. 

Del took all this well. In a way I think he recognized that people challenged his views because they respected his defense of them and what it said about his character. But I wonder now, when I think about he and my grandmother, if perhaps I challenged him too much, if I should have instead just followed his lead and taken his loyalty for what it was:  a fine model of character.  I wonder if I failed him over the years.

When I was willful or whingy up at the lake Del used to squint at me and shake his fist playfully and say: boy, you’re cruising for a knuckle sandwich. Hazel’d say ahh now Del, stop that. But behind his fist he always had these soft eyes that told me he wasn’t out to do any harm.  His pose was protective, sheltering.    

When I came to see Del for the last time he was shaking his fist at the soulless world of hospital administration.  But behind that frustration I saw those same eyes filled with compassion for his wife, family and friends.  At one point he turned to me and said don’t let them do this to you, Ryan, just don’t let them do it to you peanut. 

I cried helplessly then.  He was brave and scared and we both felt so helpless.  But that’s when his character brought him through.   He never acted out against his family or friends. Del was loyal to the end.  

I spoke to Hazel on the phone after her trip to Del’s first memorial in California last month. She flew west, for the first time in years and she said she looked out the window the whole way. Accustomed to driving and seeing all the mini malls and other freeway oasis’s, she said the vast empty spaces she saw from six miles up surprised her. She used the word desolate to describe it.  And I tried to imagine what the world might look like to someone who just lost a husband of so many years—such a vast absence.  I can’t. But I feel his absence too.  And I wish I had asked him more about his past and that big empty plain behind him in that photo. I wish he was here to help us make sense of tomorrow too.  But I can imagine him there now in that space, looking proud and resolute.  And so I’ve tried to let what I knew and loved of his fine character fill in the rest.  
