---
layout: post
title: Eulogy - Ray Tuggle
---
*Cedartown, Georgia*
*July 14, 2017*


A few weeks ago Grandpa reminded me that static electricity discharges much more readily in the upper atmosphere than down here on the ground. This was why he often advised Air Force colonels and Deputy Assistant Directors for Intelligence to let the camera systems outgas for a few days before turning them on. It was one of the many ways he’d learned to preserve the intricate machines he sent into space.  
Ray Tuggle was a mechanical engineer in the service of a cold war that spanned exactly the forty odd years of his career. He was a satellite man, among the first in history to build contraptions that zoomed around the earth from outer space, taking photographs. He was also a family man, coauthor of a true and abiding love story. In all of this he was diligent and meticulous, building systems that overcame seemingly impossible challenges. 
Ten years ago Grandpa told me that the formula for a successful marriage is to give a little more than your share. If you can find a way to put in a little bit extra, and she does the same, then everything works better. He said that was the way it had always been with him and Grandma, the system that brought them so far over the years, from a mismatched double date here in Cedartown, Georgia to a thriving life in Sunnyvale, California punctuated by excursions around the world. 
Ray and Liz spent their lives giving more of themselves and finding more in return. Ray took every chance to add a little extra structure to the union: every fixture properly mounted, every gadget finely tuned, every automobile running smoothly without the smallest scratch or faintest shadow of grime. For her part, Liz added a little extra texture and feeling: lush plants and flowers in every corner, colorful backstories for every gathering, an assortment of family and friends to ride along in every car. While the culture of the time may have overemphasized this particular delegation of duties, there was undeniably graceful symmetry in the coupling of this man who took a practical approach to outer space and this woman who thought Vidalia onions were out of this world.    
Thirty years ago Grandpa and Grandma took a trip together, sailing the Mediterranean Sea from Greece to Turkey. It coincided with their retirement and in some ways it was the culmination of all the toil and effort they expended over the years, the final perk to savor after countless sixty hour weeks and tens of thousands of airline miles. The trip represented the good memories they shared, the kind that cut through sadness, even when Grandma’s cancer returned and snatched away the other plans they had. Memories of the wild markets in Istanbul, the giant ships slinking the Bosporus, the splash of the waves lulling them to sleep on the deck shone through the disappointments, overcame regret.
Ray’s greatest success finds expression on this little boat, the love of his life at his side, his mind alternating between her enjoyment of the blue sky and the precise orbits of the satellites circling just beyond it, her smiling face just emerged from the sparkling water and the image of that same water as it appears in one meter resolution when photographed from space.
Sixty years ago Grandpa could not talk about his work at all. Aerial reconnaissance was the lynchpin of our Containment policy; in order to stop the spread of Communism the U.S. government needed to know exactly where the Soviets were. Photographs from space met much of this need, despite being devastatingly hard to make. Explosions and malfunctions marked every milestone of the satellite program. Among them were the spots and blotches of exposed film that clouded early images recovered from the satellites. Trying to figure out why, Grandpa and his colleagues observed the camera apparatus in a vacuum chamber, slowly reducing the air pressure and marveling at the sparks that popped and glowed, bright enough to expose the big reams of film.  
Ray and his colleagues figured out a way to see absolutely anywhere on the surface of the earth. They did it by conquering one impossible challenge after another: overcoming gravity to achieve orbit, taming wild gyrations to keep the cameras pointed earthward, snagging film canisters plummeting like meteors through the sky, catching the red-eye from SFO to Dulles because the analysts at Langley just won’t wait. Breaking ground on this road they somehow brought us to this place we are today where we grab signals from space casually, consulting our phones as we zip down highway 278. 
Eighty six years ago Grandpa was born here in Cedartown GA. His mother kept a sturdy old house next to the railroad tracks that his father worked as a conductor. Watching his brother swoop low over the tracks in a navy plane he learned to dream of flying, sharing dinner with his sweet older sister he learned to be generous with others, out on the street with a neighbor he learned the intricate workings of automobiles, watching the pieces closely, turning them in his hands, ordering them in his mind. Together the people in this town somehow taught him everything he needed to go out into the world, to love deeply, to send intricate machines out into space.
So today we’ll look up and we’ll remember Ray Tuggle with pride, we’ll come to this place in gratitude for the man it gave us, we’ll add our love to his, and we’ll commit as he did to give just a little more than our fair share and continue to build systems that overcome seemingly impossible challenges.  
